I'll say it again, this was where it was used by... My partner, he dressed up in motor stick time, John, it was about knowing the books.
But if you thought it was set up as an institution, the private library, he opened it to qualified scholars.
He was way ahead of his time when Morgan was collecting...
You know, and before he established this thing as a life, nobody had the slightest... Morgan was not that kind of collection.
Morgan's concept of collecting... He had things he wouldn't let anybody see.
They were not that kind of collection.
Morgan, all Morgan wanted was jewels.
Jewels.
I mean, he didn't have a literary menu, but he wanted Emily Bronte's...
Manuscripts.
That's all he wants.
He didn't want all the correspondence with the publisher or any of that stuff.
He just wanted this manuscript.
Sell it.
He wanted something to put in the setting he admired.
Disintended from its origins.
And that's what the folks... Why did he give it to the state of New York?
That's on Sunday.
Well, he had to do something.
But the point is, he didn't discuss it.
No, no, because he was using a Dan Carter Brown model.
But he wasn't just a jewel, I think, because they do support research.
Oh, yes, you get enough jewels together.
But again, it doesn't happen.
Conceptual unity.
Well, and then it kind of expanded to Elizabethan's.
No, that was done under Louis Wright.
When Louis Wright took over as a librarian, he was the one who expanded that.
The program has become more like the John Carter Brown Library in that now it is a library that concentrates
on a historical period and place.
We don't even really even have a place in a way, because Folger's a great library for, you know, 16th, 17th, 18th century English history, so it evolved into that.
It didn't begin that way.
You began that way.
We began with this conceptual... Somebody was inspired.
I mean, there was really somebody who was inspired.
There were serious teachers who were inspired.
I'm really sorry.
We still don't entirely understand.
I've spent a lot of time studying it.
It started with something instant that John Carter Brown had.
And he shared that with John Muscle Father.
And he also shared it
with a number of booksellers, notably Henry Stevens.
His name keeps coming up over there.
Oh, yes, he wrote here.
Mr. John Carter Brown was his first question.
And the library Stevens, who built the Americana at the British Library.
He was the one that was also sent to sell George Washington's library to the British Library.
And then the Boston Athenaeum got people together.
Well, he gave the Boston Athenaeum.
He gave Americans an opportunity to buy it.
But then, somehow or other, John Carter Brown, along with John Russell Brown, he was a fascinating person in his own right.
He was one of the pioneers in publishing and getting people in the exploration of the Mayan Peninsula.
he published Stevens' thing on the Yucatan.
Compare for me, because there were contemporaries and there were rivals, Brown and Lennox, and what Lennox didn't... Lennox was a publisher.
But there were certainly rivals, they went after... Well, there were rivals of collectors, but no one could get in to see Lennox's books.
He built this wing onto his house, a fireproof wing.
After 1874?
After he got married, his wife... But I'm sure she was... She said, look, she was fascinated by the... She is... But he built this wing on, and...
made it available to selected scholars.
And in 1865, they published a catalog on it.
I think it was not the first bibliographical record of what constitutes a mark on it.
It's a point of departure for the subject.
I'll tell you about catalog, Mr. Barlet et al.
It's just a beautiful work, and there's a tremendous amount of research.
Where did you find Barlet?
Did Barlet find him?
Barlet was a providence.
with Warren Provinson moved to South Canada, came back, he opened a bookstore in New York City, and he opened a bookstore in New York City, and it has some connection from the beginning of Squidward.
And he knew Edgar Allan Poe, and it was sort of a meeting.
And he got persuaded the President of the United States
to make... he was a polymath, he was interested in... he was interested in early Norse discoveries, he was interested in the early Americas, I mean the Indians and Central Americans.
Yeah.
Well, there's a very good biography that we have.
It's a doctoral dissertation that John Haskell... Well, it doesn't go... It's about its whole life.
No, no, no, no, but... We'll have to look at the eulogies.
I'm sure if I can't find stuff in the library, I'll know a lot of my stuff, I'll come back.
The most fascinating thing is that...
He got this job, he was chief of the commission that ran the boundary line between Mexico and the United States after the Mexican-American War.
So he spent two or three years surveying the boundary line that established Utah and Arizona and all this.
And I made a mistake when I had to go out and make me down with the principal of interest.
Someone was telling me recently that he didn't
He was also an artist.
In the same sense of any cultivated man in those days, we had a draw because there were no... So we have a book called Bartlett's Glory, published by one of the most.
The best we have is we have the drawings.
That, I think, was the foundation of his...
very serious knowledge about history and more people about it but then when that was over he came back and became secretary of state and go back now that was about a you know about 10 of your time
But he actually was the first person to collect and publish the archives of Rhode Island.
Oh, yes.
He collected Roger Williams' paper and everything.
But he also then became John Tyler Brown's unofficial librarian, and it was very interesting.
So the two of them worked very closely together.
John Calder Brown didn't get married in the 60s years old.
I didn't know that.
Yeah.
Fascinating.
I think his wife, Sophia, proceeded.
What was the source of their income?
Their fortune?
The Browns were the first American entrepreneur.
They started in the shipping.
And whenever a new profitable industry raised its head, they moved their money into that.
They moved their shipping into taxes.
They were the first Americans who used money to make money.
The basis of their fortune was shipping, but they used the profits from that to get in the textile.
They pioneered in bringing the textile business.
In this country, they brought Samuel Slater over.
Were they involved in the slave trade at all?
I've heard that suggested.
It's a clear question.
No, it's a clear question.
Well, then we should address it and answer it.
Yeah.
There were four Brown brothers.
Actually, five.
The oldest one died at sea when he was a young man.
The elders was Nicholas.
The second one was John.
The third one, I think, was Moses, and the fourth was James.
And they, together, formed at this first, the shipping movement.
And years gone by, they separated.
Now, we...
He was a very powerful guy, and he made and lost to his retortions.
And he built this house here.
The brick house is called the John Brown House.
It's very interesting.
He built that.
It was the biggest mansion in Port Valley.
His brother, older brother Nicholas, who was more fruity, a bit more modest until a high fryer named Nightingale, who had built the big gray house.
and now where we used to be going, got into financial trouble, and Nicholas picked it up cheap.
So he had his big house, but he didn't put all that money in it.
Anyway, John did get into the slave trade.
He did, along with people in Bristol.
I'm not self-righteous.
There's no question that John Brown was deeply involved in the slave trade.
As were a lot of other Bristol families.
The Wolves and the Howes.
Nicholas Howard sent out two slaving voyages.
lost money on both and never did it again.
I may spend one or two sentences on this in my book.
It was a rarity in the 18th century for any merchant not to dabble in the same trade.
They could make money.
And he did dabble.
He lost money and didn't do what he did.
Unless you happened to be a Quaker or a few other groups that were...
By the 19th century, it became, you know, much more slavery.
He didn't stay out of it because it wasn't possible.
John Carter Brown, who started the library, was an opponent of slavery and belonged to... That's very important.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, he was, in fact, the leading opponent.
He belonged to this group that...
what it was called that sent anti-slavers out to Kansas, Nebraska to increase the population of anti-slavers.
Ignore it.
He was an opponent?
Yes.
He is not responsible for it.
It's not relevant to what you're saying.
Occasionally a black student does something about it and says,
This library is built on money that was earned by... I mean, you're... The family made the fortune from oil oil and iron mills and touchdown mills and not from slavery.
I could also... When the Civil War was over, all these soldiers were given Western lands and they weren't going to move out there.
So the grounds brought up.
They own five or six counties in Iowa today.
There's still members of the Brown family around?
Oh, good heavens.
He's a great grandson of our Board of Governors.
He's a director, but also value it all.
And the director of the... Which Brown is he?
Jay Carter Brown.
He's got the profile of New Yorker this week.
That's right.
Well, I know who Jay Carter is.
I did not realize he was a director of the Browns.
Well, we have a series of books.
And then there's another book that John Nick gave us when he was 11.
And Carter's son, the director of the National Gallery of Art, who's just now 12, and last year he was 11.
So we had this original ceremony where Jay became his father and his grandfather and gave the library a book.
Do they go quite a place, these books, in the last time?
No, they're just on the shelf, but they're nicely boxed.
The library's really an extraordinary library.
You see, he was beginning to understand it, didn't he?
No, no, I didn't.
I'll go off for a second.
You said Bill Scheidt is using you as vice president.
Yeah, it's going to be part of the priesthood, but not a part of the priesthood library.
I think that's got to be it, doesn't it?
Yeah, because we're the models of this.
We were the first people.
You know, the Folgers owned by Amherst, Amherst.
It's sort of similar.
Which caught them totally by surprise.
I was just meeting.
Oh, yes.
I mean, they had a meeting going one day and somebody said, you have no idea what just happened.
I mean, he documented and said, we've got it.
I mean, they had no idea that they were getting in until we got it.
but so i mean jay carter brown is on the board of governors of the library yeah he's not he's not he's not a book collector but he's a collector no his father was not his mother was a great book collector than his father no it's not something that's not i mean the family is sort of
who added more to a dark collector.
His grandfather, who made the library, was trained to be a book collector.
John Russell Baldwin really was the
So the sponsor of these two boys, John Nicholas Brown and Harold Brown, John Russell Crawford, after this, they're a mentor in book collecting.
They travel all over Europe.
Would the J.C.
Brown Library be different if it were a product of Brown University in Canada?
It would be absorbed and it would disappear.
It would be like the Lennox Library is at the New York Public Library.
I mean, there was a library that was comparable.
And it was a separate library.
It was set up as a separate library in New York.
And then along came Mr. Children with his money and taught the trustees of the Master Library and the Lennox Library merging.
to build the New York Public Library.
You know, this goes across the top.
It's three families, basically.
Well, the two of them, Lennox and Astor are books, taking them some money.
And then they were absorbed into that.
They created a great library.
But you go and look at the condition of some of the Lennox books, and they're shocking.
Because they were all mixed up.
Now, I don't mean to be too sentimental here, but do you think that the spirit of the founders still
Here?
There?
There or here?
Here.
Of course.
Well, I spent 25 years there.
After all, the spirit of that that was passed on to a man named Minkia.
His taste, his focus, his interest, his mandate.
The Browns.
You live with this.
Well, now they're puncturing nearly as envisageable.
I'm talking about, you know what I'm saying, it's a sentimental kind of a question.
If anything, the Columbus quintessential is coming up in just two years, you know, so
I wrote something saying that the library has waited for 100 years for the Columbus King Centenary.
What?
I don't remember now, but it's just that I'll give you something.
John Carter Brown understood that the European discovery of Morocco was the greatest secular event in human history, which it is.
I mean, there is nothing comparable to it.
And never will be.
There was only one time can the world be united.
It was two totally separate worlds.
Neither half of the other existed.
And one moment, October 12, 1492, they were permanently linked.
And that transformed the world.
And so the beginning of the modern world relates to the discovery of America.
Now, do you think the fact that the family's fortune
was based on shipping and traveling and anything to do with collecting interest?
Well, it has.
Most of what happened, much of what happened, happened on the sea.
I mean, you know, so the whole maritime dimension was always fascinating to the extent that
In the early days, John Carter Brown was collecting maritime books.
This was a logical progression.
And then that built and built the maritime collections.
Well, I came along and said, anything that's maritime is Americana.
Anything, anything.
Not that it relates to the Atlantic Ocean.
No, the oceans of the world.
Well, we don't collect our travel in America.
We've got... I wouldn't.
Well, I certainly wouldn't if I couldn't have gotten it.
But we've got some of the best.
This is great.
I mean, you know, it's a discussion.
There's nothing of all about... Well, because they also have more about Portuguese.
All right, so you see, that's the way they would grow it.
We move from what... We don't take quantum jumps in our group.
We move like a series of concentric circles.
We start in and go up to the next circle.
We find that that circle, it relaxes some circles and then go up to the next circle.
And then it gets bigger and it gets bigger, but it doesn't get a quantum jump.
But it embraces every circle as it goes.
But one of the results is that we have our collection, our own material,
And the early exploration of the Far East is one of the best in the country.
To compete with the Essex Institute on that at all?
No, no, that's technology and that's a local historical society.
No, but you know, the great competitor... Pretty good, pretty good, pretty good.
Pretty good local historical society.
Oh, yeah.
And along with the old guy.
The great competitor would be the James Ford Dahl Library of Minnesota.
Do you know about that?
James Ford Dahl?
Well... Which is a collection of books related to European expansion.
But we...
We understood tremendous interest in European expansion, but that which is focused on America, not, for example, European expansion to China and Japan and things like that.
Unless it's, I mean, we have a lot of material related to that because the Portuguese went to Brazil, they also went to Goa, and they also went to Macau and so on.
So once you collect Portuguese materials... Are you looking for anything in particular?
Are there targets of opportunity or things that just...
Do you have an active acquisition program, I guess, is the first time I ask.
Oh, yeah.
I buy all the time.
But I mean, are you looking for gaps in the same way?
No, you've got a misconception here.
Gaps.
Gaps implies collecting by the book.
It's like a stamp album.
And you want to build it.
Because you know what exists already.
And so you want to build it.
We don't collect that.
We create the stamp album.
So you don't know what it is until you see it.
And when you see it, you don't know if it exists until you see it.
Give me an example of something that you never knew existed before, if you can.
Well, let's see.
But as soon as you saw it, you knew it was wonderful.
You had to have it.
You know, Tom did the definitive bibliography of American Revolutionary Interference.
I could show it to you.
It's a novel of two-volume work.
from 1763 to 1784.
And so how many years did you spend on that?
So somebody mailed us today, I just showed a third foot, which is Latin and Adams, this American country.
So here's the Spanish people of the well-known deaths.
But you see that a lot of collectors
are people who really are slavishly following the colonial 100 as an example that's an example that's the way uh uh what's his name dave brandon sold himself to mr william that's right that's exactly right and uh
And a lot of other collectors, and they will, you know, and then with the right kind of PR, they get a lot of kudos for this, become distinguished collectors.
All they're doing is doing pale imitations that has already been done.
Anyone who collects Americana,
is a pale imitation of us.
That's why Mr. Clements went off into the manuscripts.
He knew we couldn't achieve it.
That's why Tom Street in there realizes there's no point in his taking a great collection of establishing a library.
It's very interesting.
Did you get some Street of Things?
You got everything you wanted.
Yeah, you asked him pretty well.
Yeah, well, we got everything you wanted.
Your first lap, I thought.
No, no.
It was two years of stress.
It was giving me on my price.
I took two things right out from under Counts Krause's nose by tangling something that he went off after.
Completely go, but I really wanted to.
Counts Krause is selling now.
Well, his daughter is whatever.
A Columbus letter from the Swedish sale.
A Rome, $14 million.
Oh, that was a common letter.
$650,000.
I was thinking at auction it would draw more than that.
$650,000 is not bad.
It's a depressed economy like that.
No, but you see, the JCB is what?
Now, there are other collectors of the same sort.
There's a collection right here on this campus, over in the John Hale Library.
It was formed by a man named Albert Loundes, who were Albert Loundes.
L-O-U-N-D-E-S.
Al Loundes was a boy scout when he a small child. Growing up, he would play the violin. He's a local boy. He got fascinated by books and he began collecting. And he was interested first of all in the history of biology.
And that expanded to all of natural science.
And he was buying these books before the history of science was a passion of beliefs.
He knew the books.
He understood what was in them.
Here at Brown University, there is a very fine collection on the history of mathematics, and a pretty good collection on the history of physical sciences.
So Al Lau spent his entire life building this collection.
And then when he died, his collection came.
But this was a collection in his own right was a remarkable collection.
But he was collecting it.
He didn't have any guidelines.
He didn't have any one hundred and one hundred and
the book's famous in science that was published.
He develops.
He owns all but about five books left.
Harrison Horville used his collection when he did that thing.
And there are any number of other collectors.
I'm writing a review right now of a catalog of early navigation books.
collected by a Dutchman named Crone.
And he started collecting as a young man, history navigation.
No one was buying that stuff.
You open it, and there's no text.
They're all papers.
Absolutely crucial, the same improvisation.
Crone built this collection, saved it during the war, during the German occupation, which is an exciting story in itself.
Then, in the end, he turned it over to the Sipart Museum, which is the great Dutch maritime museum library.
But he was collecting for that.
Is this a catalogue of that?
Yeah.
Who publishes it?
Well, the museum.
Who are you reviewing it for?
The book collection, the Nichols Institute.
Oh, you were doing it for Nichols.
Here's another example of that.
Here's another example of a really great collection.
I've already mentioned the collections in the collection of Texas.
And that's the Latin American collection, formed not by a private collection, but by a canned-hankers Yankee from Texas named Minnie Netanyahu Benson.
The Latin American collection is recognized.
as the greatest collection of latin americans in the world uh not for early material well well not for one but but still from they're very strong they're strong in the early in the early they're strong in the early but but
But for the 19th, for the national period of all Latin American countries.
We have the largest, Latin American, the largest, J.C.
Browns.
But, but, but, but, but, but, yeah, they've got good early stuff, not quite as good as that, but for the 19th century, no Latin American country has been comparable.
Maybe Mexico could do quite as, you know, even Mexico, Mexico can't touch what it has on Peru, Bolivia,
anyone studying Latin.
And Harry Rancho and the rest of the people in Texas ignored them.
There was a great collection.
So this is what I mean about collections that are on the cutting edge of them.
We started to talk about, just to go back about an hour or something,
We're talking about these book collecting prizes for students.
Yes.
You know, you mentioned the Yale Prize, the Bancindering Prize, which Bill Reese won, you know, when he was an undergraduate.
And also Graham Arena won.
Graham Arena.
So these two prominent dealers both won the undergraduate book collecting prize at Yale.
One respectable, the other...
I'm not writing about Graham.
He's been done.
Yeah.
I don't mean it anymore.
It's been done, I mean.
But I think these book-collecting parts of undergraduates, there's one of Cornell's, although they are, they're confirming.
There's a good one in Virginia.
Undergraduate has an interest in... Virginia has one?
Yeah.
Cornell as well, I'm sorry?
Cornell has one.
Because when we first got ours going, we wrote to a lot of different institutions to get an idea of their rules and guidelines and things.
And the undergraduates, I think it's
If you win, it solidifies something.
It's a little bit vague, and suddenly you identify it as someone who is a collector.
I wonder why an institution has such a character.
Why colleges do that?
Who do you think of Bill Jackson's principal supporter?
the men who took Winship's course.
George Parker Winship gave a course, specifically aimed wealthy young men.
And many of them turned into be collected after a whole group.
Really?
Was it Winship's course also?
What was the name of this question?
I mean, was it a bibliography?
No, it actually was in finance.
But was it the focus on collecting and preservation of objects?
What's the name of the most famous department store in Texas?
Neiman Marcus.
Stanley Marcus.
He was 80 years old.
He collected miniatures.
That's right.
Stanley Marcus was also a student of George Parker Winship's at Harvard.
He once told me that he first heard about the John Carter Bell Library, and he was his undergraduate at Harvard.
I took George Parker Winship's course.
He told you this is Marcus?
Marcus, yeah.
I didn't know him.
Is he related to me?
No, just that, you know, when you're out trying to find books and money, you try to meet as many collectors as you can.
But
Marcus said that George Parker Winsport talked all the time about the Johnny Connick Library, where he had been for half his career before he went to Harvard, so he, uh, Winship's career was hit.
So you really think there's a little vile involved to get these wealthy young men?
Winship was all vile!
That's delightful.
But also there was some at Yale.
Wasn't it?
Was it in the course?
Who taught the course at Yale?
The rare books at Yale are a whole generation behind Harvard. He went there in 1914.
left here and went back to Harvard in 14.
And his, for 10 years, he developed this.
Tinker didn't start his coterie of young students who gathered around him until 15 or 20 years later.
So Yale's always been a whole generation behind Harvard.
Because they didn't have a book collection until the Sterling was built.
They were just in the closet.
He's very interested in it.
I'm going to spend a lot of time in Yale.
Yeah, but what Bill doesn't know is he's too young.
Yeah, I think you've made a point, though.
Well, I know, but so, there's a famous, there was a wonderful librarian there,
Andrew Kehoe.
What's his name, Andrew Kehoe?
A wonderful statement he made when they opened the Stirling Library.
He was a Scotsman.
He never went to college.
And in an elaborate ceremony in front of his cathedral,
He said, gentlemen, your library is inside.
We have to close today at 2.30.
Because they're turning off the power in our building.
One last time, they're turning off the power in our building.
to correct some poorly done .
I want to show you two things.
I wanted to see some more of these.
Can I give you a call if I have any other questions?
Yeah, but let me give you two things that I've written that I think you want to read.
Yes.
One is that thing called Librarians and Enemies of Books with two question marks.
And it appeared in the College of Research Libraries about 10 years ago.
And the other thing is called
Biblioteca Americana, A Merry Maze of Changing Concepts.
Can we have copies of these?
And that appeared in the papers of the Bibliographical Society of America.
20.
It was really a text in America.
That's where I come.
Trace the history of collecting it all about.
Do you have it offered?
I can get the stuff at Harvard.
I'm going to do it on a regular basis now.
I'm yet to be disappointed.
There are various enemies of books.
is an analysis of what, how, how the structure of rare book operations has emerged between 1936 when Dad wrote that and what, and the way, and now what we are living with today.
That was published at College and Research Library, that's the, um,
It's a publication of the American Association of College of Research Libraries.
That came out in the early 80s.
And you read my thing on Hopper?
Yes.
I also did a thing on Winship.
It was never published.
his years here in providence uh if we get together again can i have your phone number yeah all right well i know i won't i would say a substantial proportion of the members of the roller club are members of snobbish reasons that's a fair statement they are not serious
There are a few.
There's Lady Eccles, and there's... There are some... In the history of the club, there have been major collectors.
I would say almost all of the people who've been president and officers aren't being, but for a lot of people, it was simply another social... Well, yeah, well, I mean, booksellers and guys... They use it for... They use it for contacts.
That's why I don't even think of a club, but it's an institution now.
More than I've done it, it's a club.
But you can go through the major figures.
People perform major collections.
We never remember him.
Harry Dean was out there.
Harry?
Harry.
He was a Philadelphia.
He ran a seed company.
He hadn't spelled that?
He was.
He was on the clock.
He ran a seed company.
One of the greatest collections of early Italian maps.
And we got only enough.
So how long were you here?
25 years.
From Wonderland.
57 to 80-something years.
And you're so private.
No question.
Stay out of your ticket.
So I came.
I didn't get into the librarian's office for seven years.
My predecessor wouldn't leave.
I'm not going to do that anymore.
When I went down to see Ed Wolfe, he's there.
He's still a presence there.
And it's hard for John because I was running there.
Let me give you an example of why William A. Jackson was a really great collector, in addition to being a great rare book librarian.
I don't know if it's still there, but there was at one time, Bill, when he started the Hosenweiser, he began collecting all of the pulp science fiction magazines.
You know, he's doing that now, Victor Burch.
You know Victor from Brandeis?
Well, maybe, but Bill saw this in 1915.
That's an important field.
It didn't cost him anything.
He showed it to me.
It was in the locker room.
I don't thought any body was there.
Do you think he liked science fiction?
He just recognized the importance of this body of literature.
And the fact that it was pulpit was probably going to be this great.
It wasn't going to last.
The fact that this was appearing.
It's vitally important to mention to the 20th century literary and intellectual.
It's a whole sign of cultural as much as anything, too, because it is a cultural phenomenon.
You know, Bill Jackson, who was a great authority reading of these books pretty big before 1640, had the wit and imagination to see that as something.
This is what I mean about a great collector.
You can look at something, and you can imagine, and say, okay, this is its significance.
Now, there are an awful lot of things that can be collected that are junk in one place, and then there's no sense in the library having it.
Whereas, to another place, it's absolutely essential.
Now, take the collection of American poetry over there in the John Haney, you know that?
No.
It's the biggest collection of American poetry in the world.
someone who once described it as the biggest collection of bad poetry.
But, John, the Harris collection has been collecting homes by Americans since the beginning, middle of the last century.
I guess absolutely everything is published every year, regardless of how good or bad it is.
So it's not selective in any way.
No, but it is an archive.
Now, 90% or a substantial percentage of that stuff
In any other library would be junk.
But because it is in that context, it becomes a rare book.
An important book.
Because of the context in which it exists.
You know the difference between a rare book and a scarce book?
Well, a scarce book is difficult to find.
A rare book is worth a lot of money.
No.
A rare book, I mean, the Gutenberg Bible is not necessarily a rare book.
for instance, not as the first one.
No, no, no, no, you're wrong.
The Diedenberg Bible is a rare book.
It's not a scarce book.
Chris Folio is not a scarce book at all.
It's a rare book.
Because it has a special significance in and of itself.
A scarce book is a matter of statistics.
How many copies, you know,
either are available or exist or something.
And how many people want it, too?
Well, uh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Then when somebody wants it, that's when rarity, when someone has a desire to own it, that's when rarity begins to really change.
Then it begins to value it.
I mean, history of science was not, were not rare books until after Sputnik.
Now, one of the things, our job here is to buy books that will become rare, and we want to get them before they become rare.
We want to be there and gone before the ... That's where perception comes in.
Ninety percent of the basic Americana in the John Carter Brown Library, I mean the classics, were here by 1900.
Roth didn't have to buy them.
I didn't have to buy them.
They were here.
We were going off buying the things that Mr. John Carter Brown was buying when they were considered unimportant.
That's the function of our kind of collection.
Now, then there's the collectors who go out, and they buy only rare books.
So those are books whose values have already been recognized.
And it's fine.
I have nothing against it, but that's a different kind of collection.
That was Poetry Collection.
Was that started by a private collector?
It was started by a man named Anthony, uh, Anthony and Harris.
They were two men.
Anthony formed the collection, a man named Harris.
But they were private collectors.
Private collectors.
And then he gave it to Brown University in the end of the last century.
And then we went on doing the Harris Collection, one of the biggest things ever.
The Harris Collection, you know, in addition, here,
And there's a very interesting phenomenon going on in there, and Brown University, and I lived through this, this flood-rofulness.
When I came here, there was a special collection.
It was kind of a bumbling operation, and they had all wonderful things, but no administration in it whatsoever.
They were among the goddamn Philippines.
The librarian, David Jonat, loved it, so he was kind of the unofficial curator trying to run the library and everything else.
Then they built the Rockefeller Library.
And Dave Jeter decided he wanted to turn that, you know, hay into a rare book library.
Then he retired, and things went back.
Well, to make a long story short, his successor was a man named Charles Churchwell.
And Charles didn't understand rare books with a hill of beans, but he was a very intelligent man.
And after having played footsie with me, with I take over all the rare books at Brown, he suddenly realized that he had a responsibility.
So he decided to go out and do something about that.
So he appointed a young man named Samuel Streit as the Associate Librarian for Special Collections.
Within the structure of a library, that's unusual.
Usually, the guy in charge of rare books is reports to the reference librarian or something.
But he's one of the three assistant librarians, Sam is.
And Sam oversaw the renovation of that building, the installation of the Ann Consolving Brown collection of military books.
the acquisition of the military books.
So really, it's the private collector who dictates where your special collections are going to be, doesn't it?
Up to a certain point.
But there's what you do with that collection.
I mean, Brown probably never thought it was going to have a preeminent collection of poetry until this guy came along.
Well, in those days, you've got to understand, in those days, Leibniz didn't think of having collections.
So they were thrilled to get whatever they got.
No, it is a very good case in point.
And I was only interested in uniforms.
So the bulk of that collection is about uniforms.
It's a fragment.
It's a small fragment, only part of military history.
There's a whole area out there to be built.
And it's not very expensive.
What's this person's name again?
Samuel Sprite.
He's the associate librarian for Special Collections.
He's not here today.
Yeah, but I mean this collection of military stuff that you're talking about.
Well, there's that, there's the lounge collection, there's the... Stop in there and pick up... I'm going to do that.
There's a book describing the special collections.
I'm going to do that.
That's in that building.
The white one, the one to the right.
The white one.
Up to the desk.
There is a...
a very handsome thing they did, describing the very special collection.
Well, I'm going to do that as soon as we break.
You said you were going to tell me some stuff about Belle Green.
Well, let's not go.
Let's get together some other things.
Okay.
I really, actually, I have to go off and do it.
Sounds good.
Well, you've been very, very generous with him.
I'll be glad to talk to you.
I think you're going to like my book.
Forty or so miles of each other.
You do have two institutions, Jason Brown and the AAS, which together...
It must have the exceptional collections of anything to do with America.
And the thing about it is that we have always, the only one looks at it is your rivals.
That's never been the case.
From the days of Winship and Brigham, Brigham and Raw, Shipton and myself, MacArthur and myself, we realize that, see, I've described this library, that's an important question to ask, I say, I described this library.
This library is really alive in European history.
books relating to America, books printed in Europe by Europeans about America.
The perception of America, the discovery of America.
In the period in which we collect, 90% of the books relating to America were printed in Europe, written by Europeans, and addressed to Europeans.
We're a dimension of European history.
Whereas an Aquarian Society is United States history.
Or continental.
Oh, no, no, they're the United States.
Well, they do predate the revolution, but they're not continental.
They don't go south of the real world.
Yeah, but physically, geographically, those areas that make up the United States.
In the early days, the main soundbook is not United States.
It was now the United States.
You see, and I say, for us, the United States almost does not exist.
It only came into existence.
It's a political boundary, in other words.
The tail end of our period.
Whereas the United States, as a concept, existed before 1776 with the antiquaries.
It's the colonial period of the United States.
If you're a scholar, you do well to go there and here.
Well, depending on what you're doing.
If you're doing the United States as, quote, American.
It's nice to have these two places within 45 miles of each other.
Oh, yeah, and we've always gotten along splendidly.
I'll talk to you.
Thanks for your time.